This is the top directory of the METAMODTHREDDS module. This module keeps
a THREDDS catalog up to date. I. e., an attempt will be made to add any new
dataset created in the METAMOD2 database, into the THREDDS catalog.

The THREDDS system itself must be installed separately, independent of the 
METAMOD2 system.

This module comprise one script:

   scripts/create_thredds_catalogs.pl

This script runs as a daemon. It wakes up at fixed intervals to see if any
dataset has been added to or removed from the database. If so, a new version
of the THREDDS catalog is created.

NOTE: The changes will only be visible in the THREDDS web interface after
      the THREDDS Data Server (TDS) has been restarted. Start and restart
      of the TDS are done independently of this module.

The script reads one configuration file that resides in the webrun directory:

   thredds_config

This file contains three different line types (commands). The line types are
identified by an initial command keyword:

   distribution <rolename> <distribution_statement>
   ignore dataset <dataset_name>
   run each <minutes> minute

Blank lines and comments are ignored. Comments starts with the '#' character
and continue to the next newline.

The 'distribution' command makes an association between the distribution
statements as found in the METAMOD2 database and the rolenames found in the
tomcat-users.xml file used by the THREDDS system. Several distribution
statements can be associated with the same rolename, but only one rolename
can be associated with a given distribution statement.

Datasets in THREDDS will only be accessible for users having the rolename
corresponding to the distribution_statement that is found for the dataset in
the METAMOD2 database.

Only top level METAMOD2 datasets (i.e. directory datasets) are checked
when the script search for distribution statements in the database. Any
distribution_statement found in a low level dataset (i.e. file dataset) is
ignored.

Datasets with the special distribution_statement "Free" (or "free") are open
for all users. For these datasets, a THREDDS catalog entry is created that
do not require the user to have any specific role.

NOTE: If no distribution statement is found for a dataset in the database,
      the dataset is given a distribution statement = "forbidden" which
      is accosiated with the rolename "FORBIDDEN". This rolename does not
      exist in tomcat-users.xml, and accordingly it wil be impossible to
      access the netCDF files belonging to the dataset through the THREDDS
      interface. The existence of the dataset and the files will be visible,
      though.

The 'ignore' command will exclude the corresponding dataset from the THREDDS
catalog. The dataset will not be visible in the THREDDS web interface at all.

The 'run' command tells the script how often it should wake up to check for
any changes in the database.

The script will read the 'thredds_config' file each time it wakes up. Changes
in the config file will accordingly not need any restart of the script itself.
